readme: actualize without much changes (#6644)
tarantool/tarantool: README.md

# Tarantool

[![Actions Status][actions-badge]][actions-url]
[![Code Coverage][coverage-badge]][coverage-url]
[![Telegram][telegram-badge]][telegram-url]
[![GitHub Discussions][discussions-badge]][discussions-url]
[![Stack Overflow][stackoverflow-badge]][stackoverflow-url]

> [Tarantool][tarantool-url] is an in-memory database and application server.

Reviewer: Didn't we rename it into an in-memory computing platform?

Author: I would prefer to keep it as is, at least within this PR.

Now the structure of the document is the following:

> Tarantool is an in-memory database and application server.
>
> <...>
>
> Key features of the application server:
>
> <...>
>
> Key features of the database:
>
> <...>

So the application server and the database sections do not require any explanation. If I'll replace 'database and application server' with 'in-memory computing platform', I'll anyway need to clarify that it is an application server and a database. So the most concise way to present key features is to keep existing wording here.

I can return here later and try to find a good wording.

Author: I'll do if you or someone else will insist.

Reviewer: Well, then you diverge from the naming - and the ideology behind it - at tarantool.io
I can propose the following wording:
```suggestion
[Tarantool][tarantool-url] is an in-memory computing platform consisting of a database and an application server.
```

Author: Okay, changed. (I hope I can resolve this discussion so.)

> https://www.tarantool.io/en/

Reviewer 2: I would remove this link as it looks lonely and not tied to anything. Better, make `Tarantool` from the follow-up sentence clickable:

```diff
- Tarantool is an ...
+ [Tarantool][tarantool-url] is an ...
```

Author: Good idea. Changed.

> Tarantool is an in-memory database and application server.

Reviewer 2: IMHO, it would be great to highlight somewhere (preferably at the beginning of the README) the license under which Tarantool is distributed.

Author: Good idea. Added.

Key features of the application server:

> * 100% compatible drop-in replacement for Lua 5.1, based on LuaJIT 2.1.

Reviewer 3: Re "**100% compatible drop-in replacement** for Lua 5.1": I doubt anyone can claim this fact. I believe, we can just stay with something like:
> You can simply use `#!/usr/bin/tarantool` instead of `#!/usr/bin/lua` in your code, since Tarantool uses LuaJIT runtime for user's scripts.

Author: Well, 97% or so :) Can you propose a wording without second person writting (see [here](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Gentoo_Wiki:Guidelines)) that would be comfortable for you?

BTW, I would write `#!/usr/bin/env tarantool`, that's more universal.

Reviewer 3: Adjusted the wording considering your proposals:

> One can simply use `#!/usr/bin/env tarantool` instead of `#!/usr/bin/env lua` in Lua code, since Tarantool uses LuaJIT runtime for user's scripts.

Feel free to make any other changes to your liking.

Reviewer 4: What is sacral sense of drop-in replace of lua? Is it provide more features for users? Or user just like to drop-in one thing with another?

Author: Nothing really sacral, just 'drop-in replacement', '100% compatible' sounds cool :)

Anyway, Igor doubts that we should present tarantool this way, so I'll adjust this section in some different way. Maybe it worth to expand and split the second bullet to several bullets instead.

Author: I revisited the complete section and now it looks so:

```markdown
Key features of the application server:

* Heavily optimized Lua interpreter with incredibly fast tracing JIT compiler,
  based on LuaJIT 2.1.
* Cooperative multitasking, non-blocking IO.
* [Persistent queues][queue].
* [Sharding][vshard].
* [Cluster and application management framework][cartridge].
* Access to external databases such as [MySQL][mysql] and [PostgreSQL][pg].
* And many other built-in and standalone [modules][modules].
```

Author: I hope that this is resolved, so I will close the discussion. Feel free to reopen with comments.

  Simply use `#!/usr/bin/tarantool` instead of `#!/usr/bin/lua` in your script.

> * Full support for Lua modules and a rich set of [own modules][modules],

Reviewer: I would repeat concerns on compatibility. I believe trying to run arbitrary Lua modules can cause real problems due to the cooperative multitasking mentioned in the same sentence.

Author: Okay. Changed this way:

```markdown
Key features of the application server:

* Heavily optimized Lua interpreter with incredibly fast tracing JIT compiler,
  based on LuaJIT 2.1.
* Cooperative multitasking, non-blocking IO.
* [Persistent queues][queue].
* [Sharding][vshard].
* [Cluster and application management framework][cartridge].
* Access to external databases such as [MySQL][mysql] and [PostgreSQL][pg].
* And many other built-in and standalone [modules][modules].
```

  including cooperative multitasking, non-blocking I/O, access to external
  databases, [persistent queues][queue], [sharding][vshard], [cluster and

>   application management framework][cartridge], etc

Reviewer 2: Not sure about correct punctuation for lists, but it's inconsistent now, this list has a period at the end of the first sentence but not the last, the list below has sentences with no period at the end (and no semicolon). I would start sentences with a capital letter and use a period at the end of each item on the list.

Author: I would use this style, if I would do this from scratch. However, sure, there is some inconsistency and there are at least two persons who prefer this formatting. Okay so, changed it to capital letters and periods.

Key features of the database:

> * MsgPack data format and MsgPack based client-server protocol

Author: Good point. Changed.

> * Two data engines: 100% in-memory with optional persistence and an own

Reviewer: This one recently caused big trouble in the public chat: people believe that vinyl is the only way to have persistence. Let's substitute this 'optional' with 'complete WAL-based'.

  implementation of LSM-tree, to use with large data sets.

> * Multiple index types: HASH, TREE, RTREE, BITSET.

Reviewer 5: AFAIK, `HASH` is deprecated. Perhaps we should not mention it in new docs. @Mons can tell more.

Author: AFAIU these all just talks at the moment (in fact, these talks going two years or so). There is no final decision. We have no deprecation warning or statements in the documentation — nothing official.

I asked @Mons and he said 'Don't know. Here we can leave it.'

Author: So I'll leave it.

* Document oriented JSON path indexes.
* Asynchronous master-master replication.
* Synchronous quorum-based replication.

> * RAFT-based automatic leader election.

Reviewer: Just to be safe: mention here single-leader configuration.

Author: Replaced with the following sentence:

```markdown
* RAFT-based automatic leader election for the single-leader configuration.
```

* authentication and access control
* ANSI SQL, including views, joins, referential and check constraints
* [connectors][connectors] for many programming languages
* the database is just a C extension to the application server and can be
  turned off

Supported platforms are Linux (x86_64, aarch64), Mac OS X (x86_64, M1), FreeBSD
(x86_64).

Tarantool is ideal for data-enriched components of scalable Web architecture:
queue servers, caches, stateful Web applications.

To download and install Tarantool as a binary package for your OS or using
docker, please visit [download instructions][download].

To build Tarantool from source, see detailed [instructions][building] in the
Tarantool documentation.

Please report bugs at [issue tracker][issue-tracker]. We also warmly welcome
your feedback on the [discussions][discussions-url] page and questions on
[Stack Overflow][stackoverflow-url].

We accept contributions via pull requests. Check out our [How to get
involved][get-involved] guide.

Thank you for your interest in Tarantool!

----

> Also, don't miss our [Awesome Tarantool][awesome-list] list of delightful

Reviewer 2: I see no reason to separate this sentence from the rest of the text. Do you think it is less important than the references above?

Author: I didn't know where it is better to inject it. We had the following document flow:

* features;
* platforms;
* use cases;
* download;
* build;
* report, discuss, ask;
* contribute.

I have added the awesome list link after the 'build' paragraph and rephrased it to the style 'to <..do something..>, <..do this..>'.

# Tarantool

[![Actions Status][actions-badge]][actions-url]
[![Code Coverage][coverage-badge]][coverage-url]
[![Telegram][telegram-badge]][telegram-url]
[![GitHub Discussions][discussions-badge]][discussions-url]
[![Stack Overflow][stackoverflow-badge]][stackoverflow-url]

[Tarantool][tarantool-url] is an in-memory database and application server.

It is distributed under [BSD 2-Clause][license] terms.

Key features of the application server:

* Heavily optimized Lua interpreter with incredibly fast tracing JIT compiler,
  based on LuaJIT 2.1.
* Cooperative multitasking, non-blocking IO.
* [Persistent queues][queue].
* [Sharding][vshard].
* [Cluster and application management framework][cartridge].
* Access to external databases such as [MySQL][mysql] and [PostgreSQL][pg].

> * And many other built-in and standalone [modules][modules].

Author: @patiencedaur suggested to avoid 'and' in list items. I'll change it so.

Author: Replaced:

```diff
-* And many other built-in and standalone [modules][modules].
+* A rich set of built-in and standalone [modules][modules].
```

Not sure I like it more than the previous version, but okay.

database and an application server.

It is distributed under [BSD 2-Clause][license] terms.

Key features of the application server:

* Heavily optimized Lua interpreter with incredibly fast tracing JIT compiler,
  based on LuaJIT 2.1.
* Cooperative multitasking, non-blocking IO.
* [Persistent queues][queue].
* [Sharding][vshard].
* [Cluster and application management framework][cartridge].
* Access to external databases such as [MySQL][mysql] and [PostgreSQL][pg].
* A rich set of built-in and standalone [modules][modules].

Key features of the database:

* MessagePack data format and MessagePack based client-server protocol.
* Two data engines: 100% in-memory with complete WAL-based persistence and an
  own implementation of LSM-tree, to use with large data sets.
* Multiple index types: HASH, TREE, RTREE, BITSET.
* Document oriented JSON path indexes.
* Asynchronous master-master replication.
* Synchronous quorum-based replication.
* RAFT-based automatic leader election for the single-leader configuration.
* Authentication and access control.
* ANSI SQL, including views, joins, referential and check constraints.
* [Connectors][connectors] for many programming languages.

> * The database is just a C extension to the application server and can be

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* The database is a C extension of the application server and can be
```

Author: Your variant sounds better for me, replaced.

  turned off.

Supported platforms are Linux (x86_64, aarch64), Mac OS X (x86_64, M1), FreeBSD
(x86_64).

Tarantool is ideal for data-enriched components of scalable Web architecture:
queue servers, caches, stateful Web applications.

To download and install Tarantool as a binary package for your OS or using

> docker, please visit [download instructions][download].

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Docker, please see the [download instructions][download].
```
"Visiting instructions" sounds a bit off to me

Author: I agree: either 'see the instruction' or 'visit the instruction page'. I picked up your variant ('see the instruction').

To build Tarantool from source, see detailed [instructions][building] in the
Tarantool documentation.

To find modules, connectors and tools for Tarantool, check out our [Awesome
Tarantool][awesome-list] list.

> Please report bugs at [issue tracker][issue-tracker]. We also warmly welcome

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Please report bugs in our [issue tracker][issue-tracker]. We also warmly welcome
```

Author: For me 'report at issue tracker' sounds strange too. I replaced it with 'report to our issue tracker'.
